# Exercise 1 - Up and running

In this exercise you will set up the local development environment required for the next exercises.

You will learn to:

- Install the required software
- Set up and run the local development environment

## Before you start

- :pencil2: Start by cloning this repository into a folder on your computer if you haven't done so already. If you've never used git before, you can alternatively use the the "Download ZIP" button to the right.
- :book: Although you have this `README.md` file on your computer, it's easier to read it on GitHub with formatting. We therefore recommend you keep a web browser tab open with the exercise tasks.

## 1.1 Installing software

### 1.1.1 Node.js

:book: Node.js is the platform/runtime that's going to run our web server and backend code. You can test if you already have Node.js installed by opening a terminal and entering `node -v` which should return a version number if it's installed.

:pencil2: If you don't have Node.js installed, you can download the latest LTS (long-term support) release from [nodejs.org](https://nodejs.org/en/).

:exclamation: **Note:** If you have Node installed with a version _less_ than the latest LTS version, please upgrade to the latest LTS version before continuing.

### 1.1.2 Chrome

:pencil2: [Install Google Chrome if you don't have it](https://www.google.com/chrome/browser/desktop/)

## 1.2 Local development environment setup

:book: In order to kickstart the exercises we have created a starter project for you.

:pencil2: Open a terminal and change directories to the `src` folder.

:pencil2: Install all [npm](https://npmjs.com) dependencies by running the following command:

```bash
$ npm install
```

:pencil2: Run the following commands to start the web app:

```bash
$ npm start
```

:pencil2: Open [http://localhost:3000](http://localhost:3000) in Chrome

:book: You should now see the text "Hello Nerdschool!" displayed on the screen.

:pencil2: To stop the application, press <kbd>CTRL</kbd>+<kbd>C</kbd> while inside the terminal window you started the application in.

### 1.2.2 Starter project structure

:book: The `src` folder in this repository contains the starter project where we will be doing all our programming in the next exercises:

```bash
src
├── app.js
├── backend
├── frontend
├── package-lock.json
└── package.json
```

#### `app.js`

:book: This is the main entry point for the web app. It is responsible for starting up a web server using the [Express](https://expressjs.com/) web app framework.

#### `backend` (folder)

:book: This folder contains backend-related code that runs on the web server via Express and Node.js.

#### `frontend` (folder)

:book: This folder contains frontend-related code that runs in the browser.

#### `package.json` and `package-lock.json`

:book: `package.json` is the project mainfest file where all npm package dependencies are declared (for instance Express). `package-lock.json` is automatically generated by npm itself, no need to edit this.

## 1.3 General JavaScript troubleshooting

:book: If you get an error in the frontend JavaScript code, it will _not_ display in the web page itself, JavaScript runtime errors are displayed in the dev tools console in the browser. For more info on Chrome Dev Tools, see:

- How to open Chrome Dev Tools: [Open Chrome Dev Tools](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/devtools/open/)
- How the console works: [Console overview](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/devtools/console/)
- [Inspect network activity](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/devtools/network/) is very useful as well

:book: Errors in the backend JavaScript code will display in the terminal window where you started the web app. Debugging tools for Node.js is out of scope for this workshop. Unhandled errors will crash the app, resulting in the following message in the terminal:

```text
[nodemon] app crashed - waiting for file changes before starting...
```

:book: To restart the backend app after a crash, change a backend file and save it. The app will automatically restart itself.

:book: Note that if the backend crashes, the web server will not respond anymore, leading to Chrome saying "This site can’t be reached".

:book: See [troubleshooting.md](./../troubleshooting.md) for an overview of the most common JavaScript errors.

___

Now that we're all set-up, let's add some features to our web!

### [Go to exercise 2 :arrow_right:](../exercise-2/README.md)
